Port the informations on the Makefile.uk, exportsyms.uk and extra.ld files from the Unikraft old documentation. (#126)
unikraft/docs: content/en/docs/develop/porting.md

The [`README`](https://github.com/esnet/iperf/blob/master/README.md) for the `iperf3` program has relatively simple build instructions, and uses GNU Make which is a first good sign.
Unikraft uses GNU Make to handle its internal builds and so when we see an application using Make, it makes porting a little easier.
For non-Make type build tools (such as CMake, Bazel, etc.) it is still possible to bring this application to Unikraft, but the flags, files, and compile-time options and other items will have to be considered with more care as they do not necessarily align in the same ways.
It is still possible to bring an application using an alternative build tool, but you must closely follow how the program is built-in order to bring it to Unikraft.

Let's walk through the build process of `iperf3` from its `README`:

1. First we obtain the source code of the application:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/esnet/iperf.git
   ```

1. Then, we are asked to configure and build the application:

   ```bash
   cd ./iperf
   ./configure;
   make
   ```

If this has worked for you, your terminal will be greeted with several pieces of useful information:

> 1. The first thing we did was run `./configure`: an auto-generated utility program part of the [`automake`](https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/) build tool.

Author: You're right, it is too large for a bullet item. I would just remove the bullet since I don't think it gives enough information for a subsection and it looks fine if it just flows as a new paragraph.

`iperf3` is a benchmarking tool, and is used to determine the bandwidth between a client and server.
It is an excellent application to be run as a Unikernel for several reasons:

1. It can run as a "server-type" application, receiving and processing requests for clients;
1. It is a standalone tool which does one thing;
1. It's [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/) and C-based;
1. And it's quite useful :)

Understanding some aspects of how an application works, particularly how it is built, is required when bringing it to Unikraft.
Usually during the porting process we also end up diving through the source code, and in the worst-case scenario, have to make a change to it.

> More on this is covered in the [Patching](./docs/develop/patching) section.

Reviewer: I think we don't have any longer this section.

Author: That will be covered by #116, it's not the purpose of this pr.

Essentially, it checks the compatibility of your system and the program in question.
If everything went well, it will tell us information about what it checked and what was available.
Usually this "`./configure`"-type program will raise any issues when it finds something missing.
One of the things it is checking is whether you have relevant shared libraries (e.g. `.so` files) installed on your system which are necessary for the application to run.
The application will be dynamically linked to these shared libraries and they will be referenced at runtime in a traditional Linux user space manner.
If something is missing, usually you must use your Linux-distro's package manager to install this dependency, such as `apt-get`.

The `./configure` program also comes with a useful `--help` page where we can learn about which features we would like to turn on and off before the build.
It's useful to study this page and see what is available, as these can later become build options for the application when it is brought to the Unikraft ecosystem.

> The only thing to notice for the case of `iperf3` is that it uses [OpenSSL](https://www.openssl.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only thing to notice in the case of `iperf3` is that it uses [OpenSSL](https://www.openssl.org).
```

### Creating a Boilerplate Microlibrary for Your Application

To get started, we must create a new library for our application.
The premise here is that we are going to "wrap" or "decorate" the source code of `iperf3` with the _lingua franca_ of Unikraft's build tool.
That is, when we eventually build the application, the Unikraft build tool will understand where to get the source code files, which ones to compile and how, with respect to the rest of Unikraft's internals and other dependencies.

Let's first start by initializing a working environment for ourselves:

1. Let's create a workspace with a typical Unikraft structure using `kraft`:

   ```bash
   cd ~/workspace
   export UK_WORKDIR=$(pwd)
   kraft list update
   kraft list pull unikraft@staging
   ```

   This will generate the necessary directory structure to build a new Unikraft application, and will also download the latest `staging` branch of Unikraft's core.
   When we list the directories, we should get something like this:

   ```bash
   $ tree -L 1
   .

>    ├── apps

Reviewer 2: Provide the output using `tree -L 1 --charset=ascii` to make it ASCII. Leave the `--charset=ascii` from the command (people don't need to type that), but make the output ASCII. I did that [here](https://github.com/unikraft-upb/scripts/blob/main/README.md).

   We can now use `kraft` to initialize a template library for us:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`. We will only be using `bash` for shell scripts, not commands, since the rendering will include the output, not just the command. If the output uses Bash keywords, it will be highlighted although it's not useful.

Author: The linter will complain if there is no language specified within code snippets.
Since we will add the `$` prefix on all commands after #129 is merged, I would say we either add `bash` and let the command and output be separated by the `$` prefix or add a separate text snippet for the command output.

Author: Yes, there is the `text` "language" for the code snippets.

Author: We can also remove the code snippets language check, and we will need to ask the reviewers to check the existence of a language when necessary.

   If you are porting a library which is called `libsomething`, still pass the full name to `kraft`, it will replace instances of `liblibsomething` with `libsomething` during the initialization of the project where appropriate.
   {{< /alert >}}

1. The next step is to register this library with `kraft` such that we can use it and manipulate it with the `kraft` toolchain. To do this, simply add the path of the newly initialized library like so:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   kraft list add ~/workspace/libs/iperf3
   ```

   This will modify your `.kraftrc` file with a new local library.
   When you have added this library directory, run the update command so that `kraft` can realize it:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   kraft list update
   ```

1. You should now be able to start using this boilerplate library with Unikraft and `kraft`.
   To view basic information about the library and to confirm everything has worked, you can run:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   kraft list show iperf3
   ```

### Using Your Library in a Unikraft Unikernel Application

Now that we have a library set up in `iperf3`'s name, located at `~/workspace/libs/iperf3`, we should immediately start using it so that we can start the porting.

To do this, we create a parallel application which uses both the library we are porting and the Unikraft core source code.

1. First start by creating a new application structure, which we can do by initializing a blank project:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   cd ~/workspace/apps
   kraft init iperf3
   ```

1. We will now have an "empty" initialized project; you'll find boilerplate in this directory, including a `kraft.yaml` file which will look something like this:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   +    version: staging
   ```

1. We are ready to configure the application to use the library.
   It should be possible to now see the boilerplate `iperf3` library within the [`menuconfig`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menuconfig) system by running:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   kraft menuconfig
   ```

   within the application folder.
   However, it will also be selected automatically since it is in the `kraft.yaml` file now if you run the configure step:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   Let's try and do this by running in our application workspace:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   Make an `include/` directory in the library's repository and copy the file:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

1. Next, let's run `make` with a special flag:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: Remove `bash`.

   }
   ```

> ## Relevant files to the build tool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Relevant Files to the Build Tool
```

Reviewer 2: Is it OK if this is heading 2 (`##`). Shouldn't it be heading 3 (`###`)?

1. **exportsyms.uk**:
   A text file where each line contains the name of one symbol that should be exported to other libraries.
   This file usually contains only `main` for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.
   If an `exportsyms.uk` file is not present, all symbols will be exported.

1. **extra.ld**:
   [Optional] Contains an amendment to the main linker script.

In the tutorial below, we will focus on files written for an application.
The process of porting a library is very similar, just change the `APP` prefix of the variable names to `LIB`.

### Makefile

The Makefile is generally short and simple and might remind you to Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.
For most applications the Makefile should contain no more than the following:

```Makefile
UK_ROOT  ?= $(PWD)/../../unikraft
UK_LIBS  ?= $(PWD)/../../libs
UK_PLATS ?= $(PWD)/../../plats
LIBS  := $(UK_LIBS)/lib1:$(UK_LIBS)/lib2:$(UK_LIBS)/libN
PLATS ?=

all:
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS)

$(MAKECMDGOALS):
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS) $(MAKECMDGOALS)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Mention that the `Makefile` (as a reader may notice) is just a wrapper around the [core `Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).

You could get the same result by using the command:

```
make -C ../../unikraft A=. L=../../libs/lib1:../../libs/lib2:../../libs/libN
```

```

For source files, Unikraft so far supports C (`.c`), C++ (`.cc`) and assembly files (`.S`).

In case you have pre-compiled object files, you could add them (but due to possible incompatible compilation flags of your pre-compiled object files, you should handle this with care):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myobj.o
```

You can also use `APPNAME_OBJS-y` to add pre-built libraries (as .o or .a):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_lib/mylib.a
```

Once you have specified all of your source files (and optionally binary files) it is generally also necessary to specify include paths and compile flags:

```Makefile
# Include paths
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES  += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CINCLUDES   += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C++ files]

# Flags for application sources
APPNAME_ASFLAGS-y   += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CFLAGS-y    += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXFLAGS-y  += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C++ files]
```

> With all of this in place, you can save `Makefile.uk`, and type `make`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With all of these in place, you can save `Makefile.uk`, and type `make`.
```

In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and decompressed but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).
To support this, Unikraft provides a "prepare" variable which you can set to a temporary marker file and from there to a target in your `Makefile.uk` file.
For example:

```Makefile
$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared: [dependencies to further targets]
       cmd && $(TOUCH) $@

UK_PREPARE += $(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared
```

In this way, you ensure that `cmd` is run before any compilation takes place.
If you use `fetch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.origin` as dependency.
If you used `patch` then add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.

Further, you may find it necessary to specify compile flags or includes only for a _specific_ source file.
Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> It is also be possible compile a single source files multiple times with different flags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also be possible compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
```

For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> **Note: The build tool treats the reserved `isr` variant specially:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note: The build tool treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.
```

  This variant is intended for build units that contain code that can also be called from interrupt context.
  Separate global architecture flags are used to generate interrupt-safe code (`ISR_ARCHFLAGS-y` instead of `ARCHFLAGS-y`).
  Generally, these flags avoid the use of extended machine units which aren't saved by the processor before entering interrupt context (e.g. floating point units, vector units).**

Finally, you may also need to provide "glue" code, for instance to implement the `main()` function that Unikraft expects you to implement by calling your application's main or init routines.
As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include`.
And of course don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.

To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files you can browse the available external applications or library repos.

> #### Makefile.uk reserved variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Makefile.uk Reserved Variables
```

                                            library
APPNAME_CINCLUDES APPNAME_CINCLUDES-y     - Includes for C files of the
                                            library
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES-y - Includes for C++ files of the
                                            library
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES APPNAME_ASINCLUDES-y   - Includes for assembly files of
                                            the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS                    - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y                    of the library (not exposed to its
                                            variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES                 - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y                 file of the library (not exposed
                                            to its variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS            - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS-y            and variant of the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES         - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES-y         file and variant of the library
```

### Config.uk

> Unikraft's configuration system is based on Linux's KConfig system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unikraft's configuration system is based on [Linux's KConfig system](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html).
```

1. After your changes have been saved to the git log, export them as patches.
   For example, if you have made one (`1`) patch only, export it like so:

   ```console
   $ git format-patch HEAD~1
   ```

   This will save a new `.patch` file in the current directory; which should be the origin source files of `iperf3`.

1. The next step is to create a `patches/` folder within the Unikraft port of the library and to move the new `.patch` file into this folder:

   ```console
   $ mkdir ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   $ mv ~/workspace/apps/iperf3/build/libiperf3/origin/iperf-3.10.1/*.patch ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   ```

> 1. To register patches against Unikraft's build tool such that they are applied before the compilation of all source files, simply indicate it in the library's `Makefile.uk`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To register patches against Unikraft's build system such that they are applied before the compilation of all source files, simply indicate it in the library's `Makefile.uk`:
```

### Relevant Files to the Build System

In order for an application or library to work with Unikraft, you need to provide some specific files:

1. **Makefile**:
   Used to specify where the main Unikraft repository is with respect to the application's repository, as well as repositories for any external libraries the application needs to use.
   The `Makefile` is not required when porting an external library.

1. **Makefile.uk**:
   The main Makefile used to specify which sources to build (and optionally where to fetch them from), include paths, flags and any application-specific targets.

1. **Config.uk**:
   A [Kconfig-like](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) snippet used to populate Unikraft's menu with application-specific options.

1. **exportsyms.uk**:
   A text file where each line contains the name of one symbol that should be exported to other libraries.
   This file usually contains only `main` for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.
   If an `exportsyms.uk` file is not present, all symbols will be exported.

1. **extra.ld**:
   [Optional] Contains an amendment to the main linker script.

> In the tutorial below, we will focus on files written for an application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the tutorial below, we will focus on files belonging to an application (i.e. not to a library).
```

> In the tutorial below, we will focus on files written for an application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the tutorial below, we will focus on files belonging to an application (i.e. not to a library).
```

### Makefile.uk

The Unikraft build system provides a number of functions and macros to make it easier to write the `Makefile.uk` file.
Also, please ensure that all variables that you define begin with `APP[NAME]_` or `LIB[NAME]_` (e.g., `APPHELLOWORLD_`) so that they are properly namespaced.

The first thing to do is to call the Unikraft `addlib` function to register the application with the system (note the letters "lib": everything in Unikraft is ultimately a library).
This function call will also populate `APPNAME_BASE` (containing the directory path to the application sources) and `APPNAME_BUILD` (containing the directory path to the application's build directory):

```Makefile
$(eval $(call addlib,appname))
```

where `name` would be replaced by your application's name.
In case your main application code should be downloaded as archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and uncompress those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files)

```Makefile

> APPNAME_ZIPNAME=myapp-v0.0.1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
APPNAME_ZIPNAME = myapp-v0.0.1
```

> APPNAME_URL=http://app.org/$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME).zip

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
APPNAME_URL = http://app.org/$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME).zip
```

$(eval $(call fetch,appname,$(APPNAME_URL)))
```

Next we set up a call to use Unikraft's patch functionality.
Even if you don't have any patches yet, it's good to have this set up in case you need it later.

```Makefile
APPNAME_PATCHDIR=$(APPNAME_BASE)/patches
$(eval $(call patch,appname,$(APPNAME_PATCHDIR),$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME)))
```

With all of this in place, you can already start testing things out:

```console
$ make menuconfig
[choose appropriate options and save configuration, see user's guide]
$ make
```

> You should see Unikraft downloading your sources, uncompressing them and doing the same plus building for any libraries you might have specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu (there'll be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't yet specified any sources to build).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should see Unikraft downloading the application archive, unpacking it and doing the same plus building for any libraries you might have specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu (there will be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't yet specified any sources to build).
```

> When building, Unikraft creates a `build` directory and places all temporary and object files under it; the application's sources are placed under `build/origin/[tarballname]/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When building, Unikraft creates a `build/` directory and places all temporary and object files under it;
the application's sources are placed under `build/origin/[tarballname]/`.
```

To tell Unikraft which source files to build we add files to the `APPNAME_SRCS-y` variable:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myfile.c
```

For source files, Unikraft so far supports C (`.c`), C++ (`.cc`) and assembly files (`.S`).

In case you have pre-compiled object files, you could add them (but due to possible incompatible compilation flags of your pre-compiled object files, you should handle this with care):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myobj.o
```

You can also use `APPNAME_OBJS-y` to add pre-built libraries (as .o or .a):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_lib/mylib.a
```

> Once you have specified all of your source files (and optionally binary files) it is generally also necessary to specify include paths and compile flags:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have specified all of your source files (and optionally binary files), it is generally also necessary to specify include paths and compile flags:
```

```Makefile
# Include paths
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES  += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CINCLUDES   += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C++ files]

# Flags for application sources
APPNAME_ASFLAGS-y   += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CFLAGS-y    += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXFLAGS-y  += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C++ files]
```

With all of these in place, you can save `Makefile.uk`, and type `make`.
Assuming that the chosen Unikraft libraries provide all of the support that your application needs, Unikraft should compile and link everything together, and output one image per target platform specified in the menu.

> In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and decompressed but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and unpacked, but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).
```

Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

It is also be possible compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

**Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.
  This variant is intended for build units that contain code that can also be called from interrupt context.
  Separate global architecture flags are used to generate interrupt-safe code (`ISR_ARCHFLAGS-y` instead of `ARCHFLAGS-y`).
  Generally, these flags avoid the use of extended machine units which aren't saved by the processor before entering interrupt context (e.g. floating point units, vector units).**

Finally, you may also need to provide "glue" code, for instance to implement the `main()` function that Unikraft expects you to implement by calling your application's main or init routines.

> As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include/`.
```

> As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include/`.
```

> And of course don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And, of course, don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.
```

> And of course don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And, of course, don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.
```

> To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files you can browse the available external applications or library repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files, you can browse the available external applications or library repositories.
```

APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS            - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS-y            and variant of the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES         - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES-y         file and variant of the library
```

### Config.uk

Unikraft's configuration system is based on [Linux's KConfig system](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html).
With `Config.uk` you define possible configurations for your application and define dependencies to other libraries.
This file is included by Unikraft to render the menu-based configuration, and to load and store configurations (aka `.config`).
Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as set variable for all `Makefile.uk` file, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.
Please ensure that all settings are properly name spaced.
They should begin with `[APPNAME]_` (e.g. `APPHELLOWORLD_`).
Please also note that some variable names are predefined for each application or library namespace (see [`Makefile.uk`](docs/develop/porting/#makefileuk)).

> We recommend as current best practice to begin the file with defining dependencies with an invisible boolean option that is set to `y`:

Reviewer 2: Clarify what "invisible" means.

```kconfig
### Invisible option for dependencies
config APPHELLOWORLD_DEPENDENCIES
	bool
	default y
	# dependencies with `select`:
	select LIBNOLIBC if !HAVE_LIBC
	select LIB1
	select LIB2
```

> In this example, `LIB1` and `LIB2` would been enabled (the user can't unselect them).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, `LIB1` and `LIB2` would be enabled (the user can't unselect them).
```

> Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any libc the Unikraft internal replacement `libnolibc` would be selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any libc, the Unikraft internal replacement `libnolibc` would be selected.
```

> Of course you could also directly define a dependency on a particular libc (e.g., `libnewlib`), instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, you could also directly define a dependency on a particular libc (e.g., `libnewlib`), instead.
```

You can also depend on feature flags (like `HAVE_LIBC`) to provide or hide options.
The feature flag `HAVE_LIBC` in this example is set as soon as a proper and full-fledged libc was selected by the user.
You can get an overview of available feature flags in `libs/Config.uk`.

Any other setting of your application can be a type of boolean, int, or string.
You are even able to define dropdown-selections.
You can find a documentation of the syntax at the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).

> Please note that Unikraft does not have tristates (the `m` option is not available).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that Unikraft does not have tristates (the `m` option, for kernel modules, is not available).
```

  	default y
  	help
  	  Help text of Option 1
```

### exportsyms.uk

Unikraft provides separate namespaces for each library.
This means that every function and variable will only be visible and linkable internally.

To make a symbol visible for other libraries, add it to this `exportsyms.uk` file.
It is simply a flat file, with one symbol name per line.
Line comments may be introduced by the hash character (`#`).
This option may be given more than once.

If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file (this is `main` if you use `libukboot`).
Most likely nothing else should be there.
For a library, all external API functions must be listed.

For the sake of file structure consistency, it is not recommended to change the default path of this symbols file, unless it is really necessary (e.g., multiple libraries are sharing the same base folder, this symbols file is part of a remotely fetched archive).
You can override it by defining the `APPNAME_EXPORTS` variable.
The path must be either absolute (you can refer with `$(APPNAME_BASE)` to the base directory of your application sources) or relative to the Unikraft sources directory.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a **Note**: If the `exportsyms.uk` file is not part of a given library (internal or external), **all** its symbols will be exported.

### extra.ld

> If your library/application needs a section in the final elf, edit your Makefile.uk to add:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your library/application needs a section in the final executable image, edit your `Makefile.uk` to add:
```

```Makefile
LIBYOURAPPNAME_SRCS-$(CONFIG_LIBYOURAPPNAME) += $(LIBYOURAPPNAME_BASE)/extra.ld
```

> An example context of extra.ld:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example context of `extra.ld`:
```

```ld
SECTIONS
{
    .uk_fs_list : {
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_start = .);
         KEEP (*(.uk_fs_list))
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_end = .);
    }
}
INSERT AFTER .text;
```

> This will add the section `.uk_fs_list` after the `.text`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will add the section `.uk_fs_list` after the `.text` section.
```

1. The next step is to create a `patches/` folder within the Unikraft port of the library and to move the new `.patch` file into this folder:

   ```console
   $ mkdir ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   $ mv ~/workspace/apps/iperf3/build/libiperf3/origin/iperf-3.10.1/*.patch ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   ```

1. To register patches against Unikraft's build system such that they are applied before the compilation of all source files, simply indicate it in the library's `Makefile.uk`:

   ```Makefile
   # Add or edit ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/Makefile.uk
   LIBIPERF3_PATCHDIR = $(LIBIPERF3_BASE)/patches
   ```

This concludes the necessary steps to port an application to Unikraft "from first principles".

### Relevant Files to the Build System

In order for an application or library to work with Unikraft, you need to provide some specific files:

1. **Makefile**:
   Used to specify where the main Unikraft repository is with respect to the application's repository, as well as repositories for any external libraries the application needs to use.
   The `Makefile` is not required when porting an external library.

1. **Makefile.uk**:

>    The main Makefile used to specify which sources to build (and optionally where to fetch them from), include paths, flags and any application-specific targets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Used to specify which sources to build (and optionally where to fetch them from), include paths, flags and any application-specific targets.
```

1. **Config.uk**:
   A [Kconfig-like](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) snippet used to populate Unikraft's menu with application-specific options.

1. **exportsyms.uk**:
   A text file where each line contains the name of one symbol that should be exported to other libraries.
   This file usually contains only `main` for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.
   If an `exportsyms.uk` file is not present, all symbols will be exported.

1. **extra.ld**:
   [Optional] Contains an amendment to the main linker script.

In the tutorial below, we will focus on files belonging to an application (i.e. not to a library).
The process of porting a library is very similar, just change the `APP` prefix of the variable names to `LIB`.

### Makefile

> The Makefile is generally short and simple and might remind you to Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Makefile is generally short and simple and might remind you of Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.
```

For most applications the Makefile should contain no more than the following:

```Makefile
UK_ROOT  ?= $(PWD)/../../unikraft
UK_LIBS  ?= $(PWD)/../../libs
UK_PLATS ?= $(PWD)/../../plats
LIBS  := $(UK_LIBS)/lib1:$(UK_LIBS)/lib2:$(UK_LIBS)/libN
PLATS ?=

all:
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS)

$(MAKECMDGOALS):
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS) $(MAKECMDGOALS)
```

You can notice that the `Makefile` is just a wrapper around the [`Unikraft core Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).

> You can get the same restult if you use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can get the same result if you use:
```

```Makefile
$(eval $(call addlib,appname))
```

where `name` would be replaced by your application's name.
In case your main application code should be downloaded as archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and uncompress those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files)

```Makefile
APPNAME_ZIPNAME = myapp-v0.0.1
APPNAME_URL = http://app.org/$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME).zip
$(eval $(call fetch,appname,$(APPNAME_URL)))
```

Next we set up a call to use Unikraft's patch functionality.
Even if you don't have any patches yet, it's good to have this set up in case you need it later.

```Makefile
APPNAME_PATCHDIR=$(APPNAME_BASE)/patches
$(eval $(call patch,appname,$(APPNAME_PATCHDIR),$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME)))
```

With all of this in place, you can already start testing things out:

```console
$ make menuconfig
[choose appropriate options and save configuration, see user's guide]
$ make
```

> You should see Unikraft downloading the application archive, unpacking it and doing the same plus building for any libraries you might have specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu (there will be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't yet specified any sources to build).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should see Unikraft downloading the application archive and unpacking it.
It will do the same for libraries specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu.
Libraries will then be built.
There will be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't yet specified any sources to build.
```

> When building, Unikraft creates a `build` directory and places all temporary and object files under it;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When building, Unikraft creates a `build/` directory and places all temporary and object files under it;
```

the application's sources are placed under `build/origin/[tarballname]/`.

> To tell Unikraft which source files to build we add files to the `APPNAME_SRCS-y` variable:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To tell Unikraft which source files to build, we add files to the `APPNAME_SRCS-y` variable:
```

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myfile.c
```

> For source files, Unikraft so far supports C (`.c`), C++ (`.cc`) and assembly files (`.S`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For source files, Unikraft so far supports C (`.c`), C++ (`.cc`, `.cxx`, `.cpp`) and assembly files (`.s`, `.S`).
```

In case you have pre-compiled object files, you could add them (but due to possible incompatible compilation flags of your pre-compiled object files, you should handle this with care):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myobj.o
```

> You can also use `APPNAME_OBJS-y` to add pre-built libraries (as .o or .a):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use `APPNAME_OBJS-y` to add pre-built libraries (as `.o` or `.a`):
```

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_lib/mylib.a
```

Once you have specified all of your source files (and optionally binary files), it is generally also necessary to specify include paths and compile flags:

```Makefile
# Include paths
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES  += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CINCLUDES   += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C++ files]

# Flags for application sources
APPNAME_ASFLAGS-y   += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CFLAGS-y    += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXFLAGS-y  += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C++ files]
```

With all of these in place, you can save `Makefile.uk`, and type `make`.
Assuming that the chosen Unikraft libraries provide all of the support that your application needs, Unikraft should compile and link everything together, and output one image per target platform specified in the menu.

> In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and unpacked but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and unpacked, but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).
```

To support this, Unikraft provides a "prepare" variable which you can set to a temporary marker file and from there to a target in your `Makefile.uk` file.
For example:

```Makefile
$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared: [dependencies to further targets]
       cmd && $(TOUCH) $@

UK_PREPARE += $(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared
```

In this way, you ensure that `cmd` is run before any compilation takes place.
If you use `fetch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.origin` as dependency.

> If you used `patch` then add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you use `patch`, then add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.
```

Further, you may find it necessary to specify compile flags or includes only for a _specific_ source file.
Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> It is also be possible compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
```

For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> **Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant differently.
```

                                            the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS                    - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y                    of the library (not exposed to its
                                            variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES                 - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y                 file of the library (not exposed
                                            to its variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS            - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS-y            and variant of the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES         - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES-y         file and variant of the library
```

### Config.uk

Unikraft's configuration system is based on [Linux's KConfig system](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html).
With `Config.uk` you define possible configurations for your application and define dependencies to other libraries.
This file is included by Unikraft to render the menu-based configuration, and to load and store configurations (aka `.config`).

> Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as set variable for all `Makefile.uk` file, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as a set variable for all `Makefile.uk` files, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.
```

Please ensure that all settings are properly name spaced.
They should begin with `[APPNAME]_` (e.g. `APPHELLOWORLD_`).
Please also note that some variable names are predefined for each application or library namespace (see [`Makefile.uk`](docs/develop/porting/#makefileuk)).

> We recommend as current best practice to begin the file with defining dependencies with an invisible boolean option that is set to `y` (i.e. an option that will not be visible in the `menuconfig` screen):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A best practice, we recommend to begin the file with defining dependencies with an invisible boolean option that is set to `y` (i.e. an option that will not be visible in the `menuconfig` screen):
```

```kconfig
### Invisible option for dependencies
config APPHELLOWORLD_DEPENDENCIES
	bool
	default y
	# dependencies with `select`:
	select LIBNOLIBC if !HAVE_LIBC
	select LIB1
	select LIB2
```

In this example, `LIB1` and `LIB2` would be enabled (the user can't unselect them).

> Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any libc, the Unikraft internal replacement `libnolibc` would be selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any libc, the Unikraft internal replacement `nolibc` would be selected.
```

> Of course, you could also directly define a dependency on a particular libc (e.g., `libnewlib`), instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, you could also directly define a dependency on a particular libc (e.g., `musl`), instead.
```

The feature flag `HAVE_LIBC` in this example is set as soon as a proper and full-fledged libc was selected by the user.
You can get an overview of available feature flags in `libs/Config.uk`.

Any other setting of your application can be a type of boolean, int, or string.
You are even able to define dropdown-selections.
You can find a documentation of the syntax at the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).
Please note that Unikraft does not have tristates (the `m` option, for kernel modules, is not available).

```kconfig
  ### App configuration
  config APPHELLOWORLD_OPTION
  	bool "Boolean Option 1"
  	default y
  	help
  	  Help text of Option 1
```

### exportsyms.uk

Unikraft provides separate namespaces for each library.
This means that every function and variable will only be visible and linkable internally.

To make a symbol visible for other libraries, add it to this `exportsyms.uk` file.
It is simply a flat file, with one symbol name per line.
Line comments may be introduced by the hash character (`#`).
This option may be given more than once.

> If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file (this is `main` if you use `libukboot`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file (this is `main` if you use the `ukboot` internal library).
```

For a library, all external API functions must be listed.

For the sake of file structure consistency, it is not recommended to change the default path of this symbols file, unless it is really necessary (e.g., multiple libraries are sharing the same base folder, this symbols file is part of a remotely fetched archive).
You can override it by defining the `APPNAME_EXPORTS` variable.
The path must be either absolute (you can refer with `$(APPNAME_BASE)` to the base directory of your application sources) or relative to the Unikraft sources directory.

**Note: If no `exportsyms.uk` file is present within a given library (internal or external), all the symbols will be exported by default.**

### extra.ld

If your library/application needs a section in the final executable image, edit your `Makefile.uk` to add:

```Makefile
LIBYOURAPPNAME_SRCS-$(CONFIG_LIBYOURAPPNAME) += $(LIBYOURAPPNAME_BASE)/extra.ld
```

An example context of `extra.ld`:

```ld
SECTIONS
{
    .uk_fs_list : {
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_start = .);
         KEEP (*(.uk_fs_list))
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_end = .);
    }
}
INSERT AFTER .text;
```

This will add the section `.uk_fs_list` after the `.text` section.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a section named `## Contributing Changes` or `## Aftermath` or `## After Porting` or anything like that. And the two sentences below will be part of that.

   For example, if you have made one (`1`) patch only, export it like so:

   ```console
   $ git format-patch HEAD~1
   ```

   This will save a new `.patch` file in the current directory; which should be the origin source files of `iperf3`.

1. The next step is to create a `patches/` folder within the Unikraft port of the library and to move the new `.patch` file into this folder:

   ```console
   $ mkdir ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   $ mv ~/workspace/apps/iperf3/build/libiperf3/origin/iperf-3.10.1/*.patch ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/patches
   ```

1. To register patches against Unikraft's build system such that they are applied before the compilation of all source files, simply indicate it in the library's `Makefile.uk`:

   ```Makefile
   # Add or edit ~/workspace/libs/iperf3/Makefile.uk
   LIBIPERF3_PATCHDIR = $(LIBIPERF3_BASE)/patches
   ```

This concludes the necessary steps to port an application to Unikraft "from first principles".

> ### Files Relevant to the Build System

Reviewer 2: I'm not that happy that some information is presented above and then again here (`Makefile`, `Makefile.uk`, `Config.uk`).

Maybe we can just rename this section into `Internals of the Unikraft Build System` and then state that: "As we saw above, Unikraft uses a set of files as part of the configuration and build steps.
When porting an application, you want to be aware of these files and tune them to your needs.
This section delves into the internals of the Unikraft build system and how they are useful for porting an application."

> In order for an application or library to work with Unikraft, you need to provide some specific files:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order for an application or library to work with the [Unikraft Make-based build system](/docs/usage/make_build), you need to provide some specific files:
```

   The `Makefile` is not required when porting an external library.

1. **Makefile.uk**:
   Used to specify which sources to build (and optionally where to fetch them from), include paths, flags and any application-specific targets.

1. **Config.uk**:
   A [Kconfig-like](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) snippet used to populate Unikraft's menu with application-specific options.

1. **exportsyms.uk**:
   A text file where each line contains the name of one symbol that should be exported to other libraries.
   This file usually contains only `main` for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.
   If an `exportsyms.uk` file is not present, all symbols will be exported.

1. **extra.ld**:
   [Optional] Contains an amendment to the main linker script.

In the tutorial below, we will focus on files belonging to an application (i.e. not to a library).
The process of porting a library is very similar, just change the `APP` prefix of the variable names to `LIB`.

> ### Makefile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Makefile
```

> The Makefile is generally short and simple and might remind you of Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Makefile` is generally short and simple and might remind you of Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.
```

For most applications the Makefile should contain no more than the following:

```Makefile
UK_ROOT  ?= $(PWD)/../../unikraft
UK_LIBS  ?= $(PWD)/../../libs
UK_PLATS ?= $(PWD)/../../plats
LIBS  := $(UK_LIBS)/lib1:$(UK_LIBS)/lib2:$(UK_LIBS)/libN
PLATS ?=

all:
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS)

$(MAKECMDGOALS):
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS) $(MAKECMDGOALS)
```

> You can notice that the `Makefile` is just a wrapper around the [`Unikraft core Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can notice that the `Makefile` is just a wrapper around the [Unikraft core `Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).
```

You can get the same result if you use:

```console
$ make -C ../../unikraft A=. L=../../libs/lib1:../../libs/lib2:../../libs/libN
```

> ### Makefile.uk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Makefile.uk
```

The Unikraft build system provides a number of functions and macros to make it easier to write the `Makefile.uk` file.

> Also, please ensure that all variables that you define begin with `APP[NAME]_` or `LIB[NAME]_` (e.g., `APPHELLOWORLD_`) so that they are properly namespaced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, ensure that all variables that you define begin with `APP[NAME]_` or `LIB[NAME]_` (e.g., `APPHELLOWORLD_`) so that they are properly namespaced.
```

The first thing to do is to call the Unikraft `addlib` function to register the application with the system (note the letters "lib": everything in Unikraft is ultimately a library).
This function call will also populate `APPNAME_BASE` (containing the directory path to the application sources) and `APPNAME_BUILD` (containing the directory path to the application's build directory):

```Makefile
$(eval $(call addlib,appname))
```

where `name` would be replaced by your application's name.

> In case your main application code should be downloaded as archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and uncompress those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case your main application code should be downloaded as an archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and unpack those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files)
```

```Makefile
APPNAME_ZIPNAME = myapp-v0.0.1
APPNAME_URL = http://app.org/$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME).zip
$(eval $(call fetch,appname,$(APPNAME_URL)))
```

Next we set up a call to use Unikraft's patch functionality.
Even if you don't have any patches yet, it's good to have this set up in case you need it later.

```Makefile
APPNAME_PATCHDIR=$(APPNAME_BASE)/patches
$(eval $(call patch,appname,$(APPNAME_PATCHDIR),$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME)))
```

With all of this in place, you can already start testing things out:

```console
$ make menuconfig
[choose appropriate options and save configuration, see user's guide]
$ make
```

You should see Unikraft downloading the application archive and unpacking it.
It will do the same for libraries specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu.
Libraries will then be built.
There will be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't specified any sources to build.
When building, Unikraft creates a `build/` directory and places all temporary and object files under it;

> the application's sources are placed under `build/origin/[tarballname]/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the application sources are placed under `build/origin/[tarballname]/`.
```

For example:

```Makefile
$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared: [dependencies to further targets]
       cmd && $(TOUCH) $@

UK_PREPARE += $(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared
```

In this way, you ensure that `cmd` is run before any compilation takes place.
If you use `fetch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.origin` as dependency.
If you use `patch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.

Further, you may find it necessary to specify compile flags or includes only for a _specific_ source file.
Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

It is also possible to compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

**Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant differently.

>   This variant is intended for build units that contain code that can also be called from interrupt context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This variant is intended for build units that contain code that can also be called from interrupt context.
```

>   Separate global architecture flags are used to generate interrupt-safe code (`ISR_ARCHFLAGS-y` instead of `ARCHFLAGS-y`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Separate global architecture flags are used to generate interrupt-safe code (`ISR_ARCHFLAGS-y` instead of `ARCHFLAGS-y`).
```

>   Generally, these flags avoid the use of extended machine units which aren't saved by the processor before entering interrupt context (e.g. floating point units, vector units).**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, these flags avoid the use of extended machine units which aren't saved by the processor before entering interrupt context (e.g. floating point units, vector units).**
```

Finally, you may also need to provide "glue" code, for instance to implement the `main()` function that Unikraft expects you to implement by calling your application's main or init routines.
As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include/`.
And, of course, don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.

To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files, you can browse the available external applications or library repositories.

> #### Makefile.uk Reserved Variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Makefile.uk Reserved Variables
```

Reserved variable names in the name scope are so far:

> ```Makefile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```text
```

                                            library
APPNAME_CINCLUDES APPNAME_CINCLUDES-y     - Includes for C files of the
                                            library
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES-y - Includes for C++ files of the
                                            library
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES APPNAME_ASINCLUDES-y   - Includes for assembly files of
                                            the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS                    - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y                    of the library (not exposed to its
                                            variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES                 - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y                 file of the library (not exposed
                                            to its variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS            - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS-y            and variant of the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES         - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES-y         file and variant of the library
```

> ### Config.uk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Config.uk
```

	select LIB1
	select LIB2
```

In this example, `LIB1` and `LIB2` would be enabled (the user can't unselect them).
Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any `libc`, the Unikraft internal replacement `nolibc` would be selected.
Of course, you could also directly define a dependency on a particular `libc` (e.g., `libmusl`), instead.
You can also depend on feature flags (like `HAVE_LIBC`) to provide or hide options.
The feature flag `HAVE_LIBC` in this example is set as soon as a proper and full-fledged `libc` was selected by the user.
You can get an overview of available feature flags in `libs/Config.uk`.

Any other setting of your application can be a type of boolean, int, or string.
You are even able to define dropdown-selections.
You can find a documentation of the syntax at the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).
Please note that Unikraft does not have tristates (the `m` option, for kernel modules, is not available).

```kconfig
  ### App configuration
  config APPHELLOWORLD_OPTION
  	bool "Boolean Option 1"
  	default y
  	help
  	  Help text of Option 1
```

> ### exportsyms.uk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### exportsyms.uk
```

Unikraft provides separate namespaces for each library.
This means that every function and variable will only be visible and linkable internally.

To make a symbol visible for other libraries, add it to this `exportsyms.uk` file.
It is simply a flat file, with one symbol name per line.
Line comments may be introduced by the hash character (`#`).

> This option may be given more than once.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? I would remove this, sounds confusing.

> If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file (this is `main` if you use the `ukboot` internal library).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file.
```

I think it's too much to mention `ukboot`. It confuses the reader.

Most likely nothing else should be there.
For a library, all external API functions must be listed.

For the sake of file structure consistency, it is not recommended to change the default path of this symbols file, unless it is really necessary (e.g., multiple libraries are sharing the same base folder, this symbols file is part of a remotely fetched archive).
You can override it by defining the `APPNAME_EXPORTS` variable.
The path must be either absolute (you can refer with `$(APPNAME_BASE)` to the base directory of your application sources) or relative to the Unikraft sources directory.

> **Note: If no `exportsyms.uk` file is present within a given library (internal or external), all the symbols will be exported by default.**

Reviewer 2: I would use the [`alert` shortcode](https://www.docsy.dev/docs/adding-content/shortcodes/#alert) for notes.

> ### extra.ld

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### extra.ld
```

When porting an application, you want to be aware of these files and tune them to your needs.
This section delves into the internals of the Unikraft build system and how they are useful for porting an application.

In order for an application or library to work with the [Unikraft `Make`-based build system](/docs/usage/make_build), you need to provide some specific files:

1. **Makefile**:
   Used to specify where the main Unikraft repository is with respect to the application's repository, as well as repositories for any external libraries the application needs to use.
   The `Makefile` is not required when porting an external library.

1. **Makefile.uk**:
   Used to specify which sources to build (and optionally where to fetch them from), include paths, flags and any application-specific targets.

1. **Config.uk**:
   A [Kconfig-like](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) snippet used to populate Unikraft's menu with application-specific options.

1. **exportsyms.uk**:
   A text file where each line contains the name of one symbol that should be exported to other libraries.

>    This file usually contains only `main` for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This file usually contains only the `main()` function for an application that is developed/ported as a single library to Unikraft.
```

#### Makefile

The `Makefile` is generally short and simple and might remind you of Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.
For most applications the `Makefile` should contain no more than the following:

```Makefile
UK_ROOT  ?= $(PWD)/../../unikraft
UK_LIBS  ?= $(PWD)/../../libs
UK_PLATS ?= $(PWD)/../../plats
LIBS  := $(UK_LIBS)/lib1:$(UK_LIBS)/lib2:$(UK_LIBS)/libN
PLATS ?=

all:
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS)

$(MAKECMDGOALS):
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS) $(MAKECMDGOALS)
```

You can notice that the `Makefile` is just a wrapper around the [Unikraft core `Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).
You can get the same result if you use:

```console
$ make -C ../../unikraft A=. L=../../libs/lib1:../../libs/lib2:../../libs/libN
```

#### Makefile.uk

The Unikraft build system provides a number of functions and macros to make it easier to write the `Makefile.uk` file.
Also, ensure that all variables that you define begin with `APP[NAME]_` or `LIB[NAME]_` (e.g., `APPHELLOWORLD_`) so that they are properly namespaced.

> The first thing to do is to call the Unikraft `addlib` function to register the application with the system (note the letters "lib": everything in Unikraft is ultimately a library).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first thing to do is to call [the Unikraft `addlib` function](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/support/build/Makefile.rules#L195) to register the application with the system (note the letters `lib`: everything in Unikraft is ultimately a library).
```

This function call will also populate `APPNAME_BASE` (containing the directory path to the application sources) and `APPNAME_BUILD` (containing the directory path to the application's build directory):

```Makefile
$(eval $(call addlib,appname))
```

where `name` would be replaced by your application's name.

> In case your main application code should be downloaded as an archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and unpack those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case your main application code should be downloaded as an archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and unpack those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files):
```

> In case your main application code should be downloaded as an archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call Unikraft's `fetch` command to download and unpack those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case your main application code should be downloaded as an archive from a remote server, the next step is to set up a variable to point to a URL with the application sources (or objects, or pre-linked libraries, see further below), and to call [the Unikraft `fetch` function](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/support/build/Makefile.rules#L456) to download and unpack those sources (`APPNAME_ORIGIN` is populated containing the directory path to the extracted files):
```

```Makefile
APPNAME_ZIPNAME = myapp-v0.0.1
APPNAME_URL = http://app.org/$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME).zip
$(eval $(call fetch,appname,$(APPNAME_URL)))
```

> Next we set up a call to use Unikraft's patch functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next we set up a call to [the Unikraft `patch` function](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/support/build/Makefile.rules#L360).
```

Even if you don't have any patches yet, it's good to have this set up in case you need it later.

```Makefile
APPNAME_PATCHDIR=$(APPNAME_BASE)/patches
$(eval $(call patch,appname,$(APPNAME_PATCHDIR),$(APPNAME_ZIPNAME)))
```

With all of this in place, you can already start testing things out:

```console
$ make menuconfig
[choose appropriate options and save configuration, see user's guide]
$ make
```

You should see Unikraft downloading the application archive and unpacking it.
It will do the same for libraries specified in the `Makefile` or through the menu.
Libraries will then be built.

> There will be nothing to build for your application yet as we haven't specified any sources to build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There will be nothing to build for your application yet, as we haven't specified any sources to build.
```

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_src/myobj.o
```

You can also use `APPNAME_OBJS-y` to add pre-built libraries (as `.o` or `.a`):

```Makefile
APPNAME_OBJS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_lib/mylib.a
```

Once you have specified all of your source files (and optionally binary files), it is generally also necessary to specify include paths and compile flags:

```Makefile
# Include paths
APPNAME_ASINCLUDES  += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CINCLUDES   += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXINCLUDES += -I$(APPNAME_BASE)/path_to_include/include [for C++ files]

# Flags for application sources
APPNAME_ASFLAGS-y   += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for assembly files]
APPNAME_CFLAGS-y    += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C files]
APPNAME_CXXFLAGS-y  += -DFLAG_NAME1 ... -DFLAG_NAMEN [for C++ files]
```

With all of these in place, you can save `Makefile.uk`, and type `make`.
Assuming that the chosen Unikraft libraries provide all of the support that your application needs, Unikraft should compile and link everything together, and output one image per target platform specified in the menu.

> In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and unpacked, but _before_ the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to all the functionality mentioned, applications might need to perform a number of additional tasks after the sources are downloaded and unpacked, but **before** the compilation takes place (e.g., run a configure script or a custom script that generates source code from source files).
```

> To support this, Unikraft provides a "prepare" variable which you can set to a temporary marker file and from there to a target in your `Makefile.uk` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To support this, Unikraft provides the [`UK_PREPARE` variable](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile#L278), connected to the internal [`prepare` target](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile#L708), which you can set to a temporary marker file, and from there to a target in your `Makefile.uk` file.
```

For example:

```Makefile
$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared: [dependencies to further targets]
       cmd && $(TOUCH) $@

UK_PREPARE += $(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared
```

In this way, you ensure that `cmd` is run before any compilation takes place.
If you use `fetch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.origin` as dependency.
If you use `patch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.

Further, you may find it necessary to specify compile flags or includes only for a _specific_ source file.
Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

It is also possible to compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> **Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant differently.

Reviewer 2: Use the [Docsy `alert` shortcode](https://www.docsy.dev/docs/adding-content/shortcodes/#alert).

This variant is intended for build units that contain code that can also be called from interrupt context.
Separate global architecture flags are used to generate interrupt-safe code (`ISR_ARCHFLAGS-y` instead of `ARCHFLAGS-y`).
Generally, these flags avoid the use of extended machine units which aren't saved by the processor before entering interrupt context (e.g. floating point units, vector units).**

Finally, you may also need to provide "glue" code, for instance to implement the `main()` function that Unikraft expects you to implement by calling your application's main or init routines.
As a rule of thumb, we suggest to place any such files in the application's main directory (`APPNAME_BASE`), and any includes they may depend on under `APPNAME_BASE/include/`.
And, of course, don't forget to add the source files and include path to `Makefile.uk`.

To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files, you can browse the available external applications or library repositories.

> ##### Makefile.uk Reserved Variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Level-5 headings are not rendered, so just remove this.

> To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files, you can browse the available external applications or library repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see full examples of `Makefile.uk` files, you can browse the available repositories for [applications](https://github.com/search?q=topic%3Aunikraft-application+org%3Aunikraft&type=Repositories) or [external libraries](https://github.com/search?q=topic%3Alibrary+org%3Aunikraft&type=Repositories).
```

                                            the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS                    - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y                    of the library (not exposed to its
                                            variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES                 - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y                 file of the library (not exposed
                                            to its variants)
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS            - Flags for a *specific* source file
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_FLAGS-y            and variant of the library
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES         - Includes for a *specific* source
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANT_INCLUDES-y         file and variant of the library
```

#### Config.uk

Unikraft's configuration system is based on [Linux's KConfig system](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html).
With `Config.uk` you define possible configurations for your application and define dependencies to other libraries.
This file is included by Unikraft to render the menu-based configuration, and to load and store configurations (aka `.config`).

> Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as set variable for all `Makefile.uk` files, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as a set variable for all `Makefile.uk` files, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.
```

> Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as a set variable for all `Makefile.uk` files, as defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each setting that is defined in this file will be globally populated as a set variable for all `Makefile.uk` files, as well as a defined macro in your source code when you use `"#include <uk/config.h>"`.
```

> Please ensure that all settings are properly name spaced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please ensure that all settings are properly namespaced.
```

As best practice, we recommend to begin the file with defining dependencies with an invisible boolean option that is set to `y` (i.e. an option that will not be visible in the `menuconfig` screen):

```kconfig
### Invisible option for dependencies
config APPHELLOWORLD_DEPENDENCIES
	bool
	default y
	# dependencies with `select`:
	select LIBNOLIBC if !HAVE_LIBC
	select LIB1
	select LIB2
```

In this example, `LIB1` and `LIB2` would be enabled (the user can't unselect them).
Additionally, if the user did not provide and select any `libc`, the Unikraft internal replacement `nolibc` would be selected.
Of course, you could also directly define a dependency on a particular `libc` (e.g., `libmusl`), instead.
You can also depend on feature flags (like `HAVE_LIBC`) to provide or hide options.
The feature flag `HAVE_LIBC` in this example is set as soon as a proper and full-fledged `libc` was selected by the user.
You can get an overview of available feature flags in `libs/Config.uk`.

Any other setting of your application can be a type of boolean, int, or string.
You are even able to define dropdown-selections.

> You can find a documentation of the syntax at the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find a documentation of the syntax in the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).
```

> You can find a documentation of the syntax in the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [the Kconfig documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) for details on the syntax.
```

  ### App configuration
  config APPHELLOWORLD_OPTION
  	bool "Boolean Option 1"
  	default y
  	help
  	  Help text of Option 1
```

#### exportsyms.uk

Unikraft provides separate namespaces for each library.
This means that every function and variable will only be visible and linkable internally.

To make a symbol visible for other libraries, add it to this `exportsyms.uk` file.
It is simply a flat file, with one symbol name per line.
Line comments may be introduced by the hash character (`#`).

If you are writing an application, you need to add your program entry point to this file.
Most likely nothing else should be there.
For a library, all external API functions must be listed.

For the sake of file structure consistency, it is not recommended to change the default path of this symbols file, unless it is really necessary (e.g., multiple libraries are sharing the same base folder, this symbols file is part of a remotely fetched archive).
You can override it by defining the `APPNAME_EXPORTS` variable.
The path must be either absolute (you can refer with `$(APPNAME_BASE)` to the base directory of your application sources) or relative to the Unikraft sources directory.

> {{% alert title="Note" color="warning" %}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% alert theme="info" %}}
```

   ```

This concludes the necessary steps to port an application to Unikraft "from first principles".

> ### Relevant Files to the Build Tool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Relevant Files to the Build System
```
Ignore the stupid warning about using `build tool` instead of `build system`

Reviewer 2: I fixed that warning in PR #178

   If an `exportsyms.uk` file is not present, all symbols will be exported.

1. **extra.ld**:
   [Optional] Contains an amendment to the main linker script.

In the tutorial below, we will focus on files written for an application.
The process of porting a library is very similar, just change the `APP` prefix of the variable names to `LIB`.

### Makefile

The Makefile is generally short and simple and might remind you to Linux kernel modules that are built off-tree.
For most applications the Makefile should contain no more than the following:

```Makefile
UK_ROOT  ?= $(PWD)/../../unikraft
UK_LIBS  ?= $(PWD)/../../libs
UK_PLATS ?= $(PWD)/../../plats
LIBS  := $(UK_LIBS)/lib1:$(UK_LIBS)/lib2:$(UK_LIBS)/libN
PLATS ?=

all:
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS)

$(MAKECMDGOALS):
        @make -C $(UK_ROOT) A=$(PWD) L=$(LIBS) P=$(PLATS) $(MAKECMDGOALS)
```

You can notice that the `Makefile` is just a wrapper around the [`Unikraft core Makefile`](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/blob/staging/Makefile).
You can get the same restult if you use:

```console
$ make -C ../../unikraft A=. L=../../libs/lib1:../../libs/lib2:../../libs/libN
```

### Makefile.uk

> The Unikraft build tool provides a number of functions and macros to make it easier to write the `Makefile.uk` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Unikraft build system provides a number of functions and macros to make it easier to write the `Makefile.uk` file.
```

To support this, Unikraft provides a "prepare" variable which you can set to a temporary marker file and from there to a target in your `Makefile.uk` file.
For example:

```Makefile
$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared: [dependencies to further targets]
       cmd && $(TOUCH) $@

UK_PREPARE += $(APPNAME_BUILD)/.prepared
```

In this way, you ensure that `cmd` is run before any compilation takes place.
If you use `fetch`, add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.origin` as dependency.
If you used `patch` then add `$(APPNAME_BUILD)/.patched` instead.

Further, you may find it necessary to specify compile flags or includes only for a _specific_ source file.
Unikraft supports this through the following syntax:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c
APPNAME_FILENAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG
APPNAME_FILENAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

It is also be possible compile a single source file multiple times with different flags.
For this case, Unikraft supports variants:

```Makefile
APPNAME_SRCS-y += $(APPNAME_BASE)/filename.c|variantname
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_FLAGS-y += -DFLAG2
APPNAME_FILENAME_VARIANTNAME_INCLUDES-y += -Iextra/include
```

> **Note: The build tool treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.
```

> **Note: The build tool treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note: The build system treats the reserved `isr` variant specially.
```

You can also depend on feature flags (like `HAVE_LIBC`) to provide or hide options.
The feature flag `HAVE_LIBC` in this example is set as soon as a proper and full-fledged libc was selected by the user.
You can get an overview of available feature flags in `libs/Config.uk`.

Any other setting of your application can be a type of boolean, int, or string.
You are even able to define dropdown-selections.
You can find a documentation of the syntax at the [Linux kernel tree](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.txt).
Please note that Unikraft does not have tristates (the `m` option is not available).

```kconfig
  ### App configuration
  config APPHELLOWORLD_OPTION
  	bool "Boolean Option 1"
  	default y
  	help
  	  Help text of Option 1
```

### exportsyms.uk

Unikraft provides separate namespaces for each library.
This means that every function and variable will only be visible and linkable internally.

To make a symbol visible for other libraries, add it to this `exportsyms.uk` file.
It is simply a flat file, with one symbol name per line.

> Line comments may be introduced by the hash character ('#').

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Line comments may be introduced by the hash character (`#`).
```

Most likely nothing else should be there.
For a library, all external API functions must be listed.

For the sake of file structure consistency, it is not recommended to change the default path of this symbols file, unless it is really necessary (e.g., multiple libraries are sharing the same base folder, this symbols file is part of a remotely fetched archive).
You can override it by defining the `APPNAME_EXPORTS` variable.
The path must be either absolute (you can refer with `$(APPNAME_BASE)` to the base directory of your application sources) or relative to the Unikraft sources directory.

### extra.ld

If your library/application needs a section in the final elf, edit your Makefile.uk to add:

```Makefile
LIBYOURAPPNAME_SRCS-$(CONFIG_LIBYOURAPPNAME) += $(LIBYOURAPPNAME_BASE)/extra.ld
```

An example context of extra.ld:

```ld
SECTIONS
{
    .uk_fs_list : {
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_start = .);
         KEEP (*(.uk_fs_list))
         PROVIDE(uk_fslist_end = .);
    }
}
INSERT AFTER .text;
```

This will add the section `.uk_fs_list` after the `.text`.

> After porting an application or library, you can share it with the rest of the community by creating a pr.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After porting an application or library, you can share it with the rest of the community by creating a PR.
```
